During the Covid 19 pandemic and numerous countries’ strategy of lockdowns and social distancing networked technologies that were not particularly new or cutting-edge have been rediscovered. Video conferencing in particular has quickly become the standard adopted means of work, education, and collaboration. In a sense old has become new (again), presented as if it has never was, quickly integrated as part of essential communication infrastructures and it’s use a key skill.

Networked performance practices have for many years been defined by the form of networked technologies. Consequently, the pandemic has brought to the fore several questions about this type of artistic practice and its use of these technologies. If the use of networked technologies is now a key everyday skill employed widely, can networked performance truly align itself with technology art, as it often has (Zapp 2004; Dixon 2007), or does it revert to a closer relationship with performance and video art of the 20th century? If the latter is the case, and for many it is still highly contentious that it qualifies as having any relationship with those art forms (Phelan 1993; Salter 2010; McHugh 2011), has networked performance become isolated within art history, pushed to irrelevance by current popularisation and commonisation of its technological form, doomed to be haunted by its artistic predecessors?

In response to these questions I started to model a series of scenes during lockdown that recreate the locations of 20th century performance and video art without the presence of the artist who performed them. The scenes consist of 3D rendered images and models recreated from video and photography documentation of the performances that can be used within various networked technologies e.g. as virtual backgrounds in Zoom or imported models in Second Life. Performances can as such be created anew yet reworked within the context of networked performance. In line with the confined circumstances networked artists are presently required to create within, all scenes are interiors, either of the artist’s home or studio. The scenes will all be released in the public domain as a form of kit intended to provoke thinking around the hauntological problems of the form of networked performance through the use of location. At present four scenes have been created based on the performances Scratching Both Walls at Once by Rebecca Horn (Figure 1), Untitled (Rape Scene) by Ana Mendieta (Figure 2), I Like America and America Likes Me by Joseph Beuys (Figure 3) and Walking in an Exaggerated Manner around a Square by Bruce Nauman (Figure 4). More will be added before the kit will be released.




I've attached the original proposal I sent for you to look over. That will give you (hopefully) a reasonably clear insight into what the work intends to do so please do have a read of that. To add to that, essentially the work centres on the idea of thinking about performance during confinement and in restricted conditions e.g. possibly within the artist's own living space or limited studio, what can be achieved when things are pared down/simplified etc. It uses classic, what should for the most part be recognisable, performances through which to do that, however, the twist is that the spaces/props/bodies/actions of those performances are only 'virtually' present both technically in image, through bluescreening, 3D rendering, interpretation etc. and conceptually through the ideas of hautology. The performances are not intended to be re-enactments (they can be, but I am hoping for more) instead they are intended to be re-workings. For me the interest lies in the fact that while performers are limited in some sense, perhaps corporeal and spatial, those concepts that are very tied to traditional ideas of what performance must be (Peggy Phelan et al.), technology but more specifically networks (a larger idea of relationality and interconnections between technology/people/spaces etc.) actually allows a performers to strip away those limitations - in this case most obviously by appearing out of their actual space and in another. The use of hauntology (some research ideas I'm developing alongside of this) is intended to demonstrate that of course it's a double-edged sword. The networks removes limitations but to be somewhere else, to visit another space to perform you have to refer to what you know or what your current frame of reference lets you imagine e.g. existing performances that then in a sense haunt current performances (which of course is not specific to performance art but cuts across all creative practices in post-modernism and after).

The media for making these performances (backdrop 3D renders for video applications such as Zoom, 3D models for 3D spaces such as Second Life, Unity, source 3D files for Blender) will ultimately be provided in the public domain as a Github repository, a performance medi pack of sorts. Anybody can download them, use them to create performances or rework the media itself and upload them as a branch (a remix essentially). That will happen either in time for the exhibition or post-exhibition (a discussion I need to have with A. P. and how he sees this being presented). For now, for the exhibition, the focus is on creating the first performances with media created. So these performances will be premieres and will be the ones used to document the work as a whole.

These are the performance media created so far (images of the first four are in the attached pdf):

Scratching Both Walls at Once by Rebecca Horn
Untitled (Rape Scene) by Ana Mendieta
I Like America and America Likes Me by Joseph Beuys
Walking in an Exaggerated Manner around a Square by Bruce Nauman
Omnipresence by Orlan (I'm finishing this at the moment)

I'd like you to think about whether any of these appeal to you - if not is there a performance you know that you would like to rework (criteria: occurs in a confined space, home, studio or perhaps gallery during a residency). I can make more as the pack is intended to be added to over time (I have others planned) but if doing this we need to factor in that each scene takes about a week to produce (depending on complexity). The collaborators (you being the first) I'm not thinking really of as collaborators as such, something beyond or more than that. You should think of the performance as yours and feel free to take it where you want within the context/concept outlined above. I'd like to see the exhibition as an opportunity to work on the performance together, that is that what is created/streamed is perhaps passed over and back and added to as a consequence of that movement, interaction and network.However, if you feel you have an idea that you want to work on alone I'm also happy for that to occur. Ultimately it is intended that will occur when the pack is later distributed.

Have a think about this over the weekend if you can. If you have any questions or ideas feel free to drop me an email. Otherwise I'll speak to you on Tuesday.